Ceph: Add interactive and preseed options to configure a dedicated Ceph network in MicroCloud (#274)
canonical/microcloud: doc/how-to/ceph_networking.rst

.. _howto-ceph-networking:

How to configure Ceph networking
================================

When running :command:`microcloud init`, you are asked if you want to provide custom subnets for the Ceph cluster.
Here are the questions you will be asked:

- ``What subnet (either IPv4 or IPv6 CIDR notation) would you like your Ceph public traffic on? [default: 203.0.113.0/24]: <answer>``
- ``What subnet (either IPv4 or IPv6 CIDR notation) would you like your Ceph internal traffic on? [default: 203.0.113.0/24]: <answer>``

> You can choose to skip both questions (just hit `Enter`) and use the default value which is the subnet used for the internal MicroCloud traffic.

Author: fixed

This is referred to as a *usual* Ceph networking setup.

.. figure:: /images/ceph_network_usual_setup.png
   :alt: All the Ceph traffic is on the same network interface
   :align: center

> But sometimes, you want to be able to use different network interfaces for some Ceph related usages.

Author: fixed

Let's imagine you have machines with network interfaces that are tailored for high throughput and low latency data transfer,
like 100 GbE+ QSFP links, and other ones that might be more suited for management traffic, like 1 GbE or 10 GbE links.

In this case, it would probably be ideal to set your Ceph internal (or cluster) traffic on the high throughput network interface and the Ceph public traffic on the management network interface. This is referred to as a *fully disaggregated* Ceph networking setup.

.. figure:: /images/ceph_network_full_setup.png
   :alt: Each type of Ceph traffic is on a different network interface, tailored for its usage.
   :align: center

> You could also decide to put both type of traffic on the same high throughput and low latency network interface. This is referred to as a *partially disaggregated* Ceph networking setup.

Author: fixed

.. figure:: /images/ceph_network_partial_setup.png
   :alt: Both the Ceph public and internal traffic are on the same high throughput network interface.
   :align: center

To use a fully or partially disaggregated Ceph networking setup with your MicroCloud, specify the corresponding subnets during the MicroCloud initialisation process.

> The following instructions build on the :ref:`get-started` tutorial and show how you can test setting up a MicroCloud with disaggregated Ceph networking inside a LXD setup.

Author: fixed

1. Create the dedicated networks for Ceph:

>     a. First, just like when you created an uplink network for MicroCloud so that the cluster members could have external connectivity, you will need to create a dedicated network for the Ceph cluster members to communicate with each other. Let's call it ``cephbr0``::

Author: fixed

        lxc config device add micro1 eth3 nic network=cephbr1 name=eth3
        lxc config device add micro2 eth3 nic network=cephbr1 name=eth3
        lxc config device add micro3 eth3 nic network=cephbr1 name=eth3
        lxc config device add micro4 eth3 nic network=cephbr1 name=eth3

3. Now, just like in the tutorial, start the VMs.

4. On each VM, bring the network interfaces up and give them an IP address within their network subnet:
    a. For the ``cephbr0`` network, do the following for each VM::

        # If the `cephbr0` gateway address is `10.0.1.1/24` (subnet should be `10.0.1.0/24`)
        ip link set enp7s0 up
        # `X` should be a number between 2 and 254, different for each VM
        ip addr add 10.0.1.X/24 dev enp7s0

    b. Do the same for ``cephbr1`` on each VM::

        # If the `cephbr1` gateway address is `10.0.2.1/24` (subnet should be `10.0.2.0/24`)
        ip link set enp8s0 up
        # `X` should be a number between 2 and 254, different for each VM
        ip addr add 10.0.2.X/24 dev enp8s0

5. Now, you can start the MicroCloud initialisation process and provide the subnets you noted down in step 1.c when asked for the Ceph networking subnets.

> #. We will use ``cephbr0`` for the Ceph internal traffic and ``cephbr1`` for the Ceph public traffic. In the real life, you'd choose the fast subnet for the internal Ceph traffic::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. We will use ``cephbr0`` for the Ceph internal traffic and ``cephbr1`` for the Ceph public traffic. In a production setup, you'd choose the fast subnet for the internal Ceph traffic::
```
VMs are also real life! :laughing:

Author: fixed

    What subnet (either IPv4 or IPv6 CIDR notation) would you like your Ceph public traffic on? [default: 203.0.113.0/24]: 10.0.2.0/24

    Interface "enp7s0" ("10.0.2.3") detected on cluster member "micro2"
    Interface "enp7s0" ("10.0.2.4") detected on cluster member "micro3"
    Interface "enp7s0" ("10.0.2.2") detected on cluster member "micro1"

>     What subnet (either IPv4 or IPv6 CIDR notation) would you like your Ceph internal traffic on? [default: 203.0.113.0/24]: 10.0.1.0/24

Reviewer 2: Because `10.0.2.0/24` was specified on the first question, the 2nd question should default to `10.0.2.0/24` as well right?

Author: fixed

    Interface "enp7s0" ("10.0.1.3") detected on cluster member "micro2"
    Interface "enp7s0" ("10.0.1.4") detected on cluster member "micro3"
    Interface "enp7s0" ("10.0.1.2") detected on cluster member "micro1"

7. The MicroCloud initialisation process will now continue as usual and the Ceph cluster will be configured with the networking setup you provided.

> 8. You can inspect the Ceph network setup:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. You can now inspect the Ceph network setup:
```

Author: fixed

    a. Inspect the Ceph configuration file:

        .. terminal::
            :input: microceph.ceph config dump
            :user: root
            :host: micro1
            :scroll:

            WHO     MASK  LEVEL     OPTION                       VALUE        RO
            global        advanced  cluster_network              10.0.1.0/24  *
            global        advanced  public_network               10.0.2.0/24  *

>             global        advanced  osd_pool_default_crush_rule  2

Reviewer: Too much indentation here as well (this time it's visible because of the line in front of the terminal view).

And the same for the following substeps.

Author: fixed

>     b. Inspect your Ceph related network traffic:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    b. Inspect your Ceph-related network traffic:
```

Author: fixed

            17:48:48.604644 IP micro1.33328 > 10.0.1.4.6803: Flags [P.], seq 359709355:359774515, ack 938811, win 1886, options [nop,nop,TS val 3647909568 ecr 3552095031], length 65160
            17:48:48.604688 IP micro1.33328 > 10.0.1.4.6803: Flags [P.], seq 359774515:359839675, ack 938811, win 1886, options [nop,nop,TS val 3647909568 ecr 3552095031], length 65160
            17:48:48.604733 IP micro1.33328 > 10.0.1.4.6803: Flags [P.], seq 359839675:359904835, ack 938811, win 1886, options [nop,nop,TS val 3647909568 ecr 3552095031], length 65160
            17:48:48.604751 IP 10.0.1.4.6803 > micro1.33328: Flags [.], ack 359709355, win 24317, options [nop,nop,TS val 3552095035 ecr 3647909568], length 0
            17:48:48.604757 IP micro1.33328 > 10.0.1.4.6803: Flags [P.], seq 359904835:359910746, ack 938811, win 1886, options [nop,nop,TS val 3647909568 ecr 3552095035], length 5911
            17:48:48.604797 IP micro1.33328 > 10.0.1.4.6803: Flags [P.], seq 359910746:359975906, ack 938811, win 1886, options [nop,nop,TS val 3647909568 ecr 3552095035], length 65160

> We showed you how to set up a MicroCloud with a fully disaggregated Ceph networking setup, but you can also set up a partially disaggregated Ceph networking setup by using the same network subnet for both the Ceph public and internal traffic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide showed how to set up a MicroCloud with a fully disaggregated Ceph networking setup, but you can also set up a partially disaggregated Ceph networking setup by using the same network subnet for both the Ceph public and internal traffic.
```

Author: fixed

.. _howto-ceph-networking:

How to configure Ceph networking
================================

> In the ``microcloud init`` setup, you are asked if you want to provide custom subnets for the Ceph cluster.

Author: fixed

Here are the questions you will be asked:

- `What subnet (either IPv4 or IPv6 CIDR notation) would you like your Ceph public traffic on? [default: 203.0.113.0/24]: <answer>`
- `What subnet (either IPv4 or IPv6 CIDR notation) would you like your Ceph internal traffic on? [default: 203.0.113.0/24]: <answer>`

You can choose to skip both questions (just click `Enter`) and use the default value which is the subnet used for the internal MicroCloud traffic.

> This is referred as a `usual Ceph networking setup`.

Author: fixed

But sometimes, you want to be able to use different network interfaces for some Ceph related usages.
Let's imagine you have machines with network interfaces that are tailored for high throughput and low latency data transfer,

> like 100GbE+ QSFP links, and other ones that might be more suited for ‘management’ traffic, like 1GbE or 10GbE links.

Author: fixed

In this case, it would probably be ideal to set your Ceph internal (or cluster) traffic on the high throughput network interface and the Ceph public traffic on the management network interface. This is referred as a `fully disaggregated Ceph networking setup`.

> You could also decide to put both type of traffic on the same high throughput and low latency network interface. This is referred as a `partially disaggregated Ceph networking setup`.

Author: fixed

Here is a picture of the different Ceph network setups we talked about:

.. figure:: /images/ceph_networking_setups.png
   :alt: The different Ceph networking setups available

>    :align: center

Author: fixed

> Now, let's see how to configure the different Ceph networking setups in the MicroCloud initialisation process.

Author: Yes I agree. And yes, in a real life scenario, the Ceph network should already exist.

> Now, let's see how to configure the different Ceph networking setups in the MicroCloud initialisation process.

Author: fixed

> 1. First, just like when you created an uplink network for MicroCloud so that the cluster members could have external connectivity, you will need to create a dedicated network for the Ceph cluster members to communicate with each other. Let's call it ``cephbr0``::

Reviewer: These are a lot of steps, which makes it hard to follow. Can you group the ones that belong together and use sub-steps?

As an example, you could combine steps 1-4 (I'm not writing the full text here, this is just to give you an idea what I mean):

1. Create the dedicated networks for Ceph:
    a. Create a network for internal traffic: ...
    b. For a fully disaggregated setup, create a second network for the public traffic: ...
    c. Find the assigned IP addresses:
       Maybe also for the second network:

Reviewer: Would it maybe be sufficient to give the full instructions for a fully disaggregated setup only, and then add a paragraph at the end that for a partially disaggregated setup, you do this with only one network and leave either the internal or the public traffic on the default MicroCloud internal subnet?

I feel that would make the instructions way more straight-forward, and it should be easy to follow.

Author: fixed

    lxc config device add micro4 eth3 nic network=cephbr1 name=eth3

7. Now, just like in the tutorial, start the VMs.
8. On each VM, bring the network interface up and give it an IP address within the network subnet::

    # If the `cephbr0` gateway address is `10.0.1.1/24` (subnet should be `10.0.1.0/24`)
    ip link set enp7s0 up
    # `X` should be a number between 2 and 254, different for each VM
    ip addr add 10.0.1.X/24 dev enp7s0

9. If you created ``cephbr1``, do the same for this network on each VM::

    # If the `cephbr1` gateway address is `10.0.2.1/24` (subnet should be `10.0.2.0/24`)
    ip link set enp8s0 up
    # `X` should be a number between 2 and 254, different for each VM
    ip addr add 10.0.2.X/24 dev enp8s0

10. Now, you can start the MicroCloud initialisation process and provide the subnets you noted down in step 3 and 4 when asked for the Ceph networking subnets.

#. If you only created ``cephbr0``, you can set the public and internal Ceph traffic on the same ``cephbr0`` subnet, but you don't have to. You can also choose to let one type of traffic on the default MicroCloud internal subnet::

>     What subnet (either IPv4 or IPv6 CIDR notation) would you like your Ceph public traffic on? [default: 203.0.113.0/24] 10.0.1.0/24

Author: `203.0.113.0/24` is already marked as a subnet used for the documentation in the page you provided. and `10.0.1.0/24` is within `10.0.0.0/8` that is used for private networks.

>     What subnet (either IPv4 or IPv6 CIDR notation) would you like your Ceph public traffic on? [default: 203.0.113.0/24] 10.0.1.0/24

Author: fixed

.. _howto-ceph-networking:

How to configure Ceph networking
================================

When running :command:`microcloud init`, you are asked if you want to provide custom subnets for the Ceph cluster.
Here are the questions you will be asked:

- ``What subnet (either IPv4 or IPv6 CIDR notation) would you like your Ceph public traffic on? [default: 203.0.113.0/24]: <answer>``
- ``What subnet (either IPv4 or IPv6 CIDR notation) would you like your Ceph internal traffic on? [default: 203.0.113.0/24]: <answer>``

You can choose to skip both questions (just hit ``Enter``) and use the default value which is the subnet used for the internal MicroCloud traffic.
This is referred to as a *usual* Ceph networking setup.

.. figure:: /images/ceph_network_usual_setup.svg

>    :alt: All the Ceph traffic is on the same network interface

Reviewer: Can you add `:width: 100%` here (and below)?
That *should* make the images clickable.

Author: fixed

#. We will use ``cephbr0`` for the Ceph internal traffic and ``cephbr1`` for the Ceph public traffic. In a production setup, you'd choose the fast subnet for the internal Ceph traffic::

    What subnet (either IPv4 or IPv6 CIDR notation) would you like your Ceph public traffic on? [default: 203.0.113.0/24]: 10.0.2.0/24

    Interface "enp7s0" ("10.0.2.3") detected on cluster member "micro2"
    Interface "enp7s0" ("10.0.2.4") detected on cluster member "micro3"
    Interface "enp7s0" ("10.0.2.2") detected on cluster member "micro1"

    What subnet (either IPv4 or IPv6 CIDR notation) would you like your Ceph internal traffic on? [default: 10.0.2.0/24]: 10.0.1.0/24

    Interface "enp7s0" ("10.0.1.3") detected on cluster member "micro2"
    Interface "enp7s0" ("10.0.1.4") detected on cluster member "micro3"
    Interface "enp7s0" ("10.0.1.2") detected on cluster member "micro1"

7. The MicroCloud initialisation process will now continue as usual and the Ceph cluster will be configured with the networking setup you provided.
8. You can now inspect the Ceph network setup:

   a. Inspect the Ceph configuration file:

>    .. terminal::

Reviewer: This is now too little indentation. ;)
It should have three spaces more (and so be aligned with "Inspect").

Author: fixed
